i'll bet you've heard of the lost
civilization of atlantis
sinking into the waters off the coast of
ancient greece
the story is supposed to be a myth but
have scientists
finally found the lost city not sure
about that
but they did find a lost continent
wait just one minute i've lost socks
keys and even a few marbles
but how careless do you have to be to
misplace an entire continent
we'll have to ask our planet about that
one earth lost what was called
greater adria between 100 and 120
million years ago so how did that happen
and where did it go
the only way to describe the process
would be kind of like a snake
slipping through rocks or going down
into a hole
it's easier to imagine losing a
continent when you think about
how hard it is to find a snake that's
escaped your curious stairs
most snakes don't leave trails in fact
if you weren't around 100 million years
ago to watch that snake slide beneath a
boulder
and i wasn't you'd never know what
happened just like scientists might
never have found adria
if it weren't for the snakeskin i mean
the mountains
let's say your fleeing snake slithers
under a rock
it's long past due for a shedding so its
old skin
scrapes off and bunches up right there
in that tiny space
between the boulder and the ground
that's what greater adria did
when it broke off from a humongous land
mass known as
gonjuana stick around for more on that
here in a few
the greenland-sized chunk headed north
when it eventually crashed into europe
it slipped
under and caused the meeting place of
the two continents to
fold and scrunch up for years and years
it just kept going
and those folds kept growing in the end
it left behind very obvious and famous
traces you might even have gone skiing
on them during a winter vacation
i'm talking about the appenys and the
swiss alps
professor dowie van hinsbergen the
geologist who led the research team
responsible for this colossal discovery
in september 2019
has his own analogy he compares this
folding action to what happens when you
stick your arm into a small space
and your shirt sleeve can't fit through
it bunches up
and those bunches are like the mountain
range you might be wondering if other
mountain ranges have similar origins
they do ever push sand together with
your hands
your hands work like shifting land
masses and those peaks of sand you
created
are a mini version of the rockies
the snakeskin your shirt sleeve the sand
the point here is that mountains get
left behind when massive chunks of land
smash into and slip under each other
but what about the disappearing
continent that leaves them
what happened to greater adria itself
just as a snake burrows underground for
the winter
adria kept sliding beneath the surface
dr
van hinsbergen thinks she's probably
nice and cozy
about 900 miles under southern europe
right now
but wait a minute is greater adria still
a continent if she's underwater or
underland
is a snake still a snake when it's
underground of course it is
in fact i know a continent that's mostly
underwater yet
isn't lost at all ever heard of
zeelandia
it's also called the new zealand
continent or tasmantis
it looks like an archipelago which is a
string of islands
but if you peek under the water you'll
see that it's really
one continuous piece of submerged land
with mountain tops poking out over the
surface
those peaks are the islands zealandia is
categorized as a micro-continent
which then begs the question
what is a continent anyway
that's a matter of some debate in fact
we earthlings can't even agree on how
many continents not counting the lost
and micro ones there
are generally a continent is an enormous
land mass
if you're from the us you heard that
there are seven of them
africa antarctica asia australia
also called oceana europe north america
and south america european school kids
however
combine europe and asia into eurasia so
they only learn six continents south
americans also recognize six
but they keep europe and asia separate
and combine
north and south america instead what's
even stranger is that everyone seems to
agree that
australia is a continent while greenland
isn't
and has to make do with the title of
world's biggest island
poor greenland this all has something to
do with the tectonic plates
that lie beneath the continents but
that's a discussion best left for
another video
so where did all these continents come
from in the first place
well if you've ever looked at a globe or
a map you probably noticed that the two
great landmasses surrounding the
atlantic ocean
north and south america on one side and
europe and africa on the other
seem like puzzle pieces that could be
pushed together to form
one even more gigantic mass you might
also know that there's a name for that
mass
pangaea scientists think pangaea
a supercontinent if there ever was one
broke apart
175 million years ago but not into those
two big
left and right puzzle pieces we have
today instead
the split probably ran horizontally
leaving a connected north america
europe and asia on top a mass called
lorasia
while south america stuck it out with
africa antarctica in australia
in a mass known as gondwana yes that
very one that greater
adria would break free from later on
so if you took all of earth's land
masses continents
microcontinents islands and archipelagos
and squished them together would you get
the original blob of land known as
pangaea
nope not only would you be missing the
parts of continents that lie
underwater like the masses connecting
archipelagos
you'd also be missing all the ones lost
over time
oh yeah there are others besides adria
scientists are looking for them
and they've already found some one of
those lost continents
is the rio grande rise it's a stretch of
underwater seamounts that's been dubbed
brazil's atlantis
greater adria lays somewhere between
north africa
and southern eurasia hey that's right
around the mediterranean sea
and the mediterranean is where greece
and athens are
so greater adria must have been atlantis
right
doubtful historians think plato made up
the story of atlantis but
could it have really happened you might
think so if you believe the story of
greek deities punishing the civilization
for starting
a beef with athens but a more scientific
theory would propose that
atlantis was simply flooded or perhaps
it could have been one of the islands
scraped off and left behind
when greater adria dove under europe
disappointing as it is to say the one
thing we can't be sure of
is that adria itself wasn't atlantis
the tectonic forces that shoved the
continent under europe
did so over 100 million years ago that's
about 80 million years before
any human showed up on our planet to
start a conflict with athens or
anyone else if you look at all the
world's continents like
broken puzzle pieces that formed a
shattered pangaea
you could say that dr van hinsbergen and
his team
have spent the last 10 years trying to
put that puzzle back together
and like actual puzzles it's hard to do
that when you're missing a bunch of
pieces
i'm looking at you adria but they have
fancy geological equipment that tracks
the magnetic record
left behind in the rock's minerals you
see
every rock stone and mountain has a sort
of imprint of the time
and place it was created it all has to
do with the earth's magnetic poles
they change every now and then in a
process called geomagnetic reversal
so in a nutshell the specific magnetism
of certain sediment and minerals
works like a map and calendar and that's
how they know where adria came from
where she ended up and who she met along
the way
by studying the magnetism of these
samples the team
also found out another interesting
detail
greater adria not only crashed into
europe but she was also spinning on the
way there
ah a twirling dancing mass of land whose
carefree trip northward would be cut
short
by an unexpected roadblock known as
europe
hey that would make for a great bedtime
fairy tale for the kids
now my only remaining question is if
greater adria dove beneath europe
could she rise again it is possible
continents keep shifting and they remain
on the move today
but they tend to go at a snail's pace so
check back in another 100 million years
and we'll see how many continents second
graders are learning about in the future
i won't be here though i'll probably
retire